First off, you have to understand we have both Federal and state governments. The concept being the Federal government makes rules for everybody, while states make rules for the citizens living within those states. Throughout the history of the US, there has always been conflict between Federal and state rights - what rules do the Feds get to make versus what rules are left to the states to decide.
Historically, states have been the ones to determine criteria for all sorts of things, including voting. After the Civil War, Congress amended the Constitution spelling out very specifically who must be allowed to vote (see the 14th amendment, which was ratified in 1868). This was done to ensure that freed slaves in the South weren't disenfranchised. One stipulation of the 14th amendment was that anyone 21 years or older should be able to vote.
States, however, maintained the right to decide the age for smoking, drinking, gambling, and so on. Many stuck with 21 years of age for all of these activities, others had lowered age limits for drinking or smoking or gambling or some combination therein.
But then the Vietnam war rolled around and 18-20 year old kids were getting drafted and having to go fight in the jungle, yet they were not old enough to vote (or, in some places, smoke or drink or gamble). There was enough ruckus over this issue that Congress passed another amendment to the Constitution in 1971 (the 26th), which lowered the voting age to 18.
The 26th amendment did not affect the drinking, smoking, or gambling ages, though, although around that time, many states lowered these age limits to 18, as well. However, after lowering the drinking age there was an notable uptick in drinking-related automobile accidents and some states raised the drinking age to 20 or 21. But it was still up to the states to decide.
In the 80s the Federal government decided to do something about this. They couldn't just say, "Hey, all you states must up the drinking age to 21" without a Constitutional amendment, so they did the next best thing: they used extortion. In 1984 the Feds passed the National Minimum Drinking Age Act of 1984, which said any state that has a drinking age under 21 will receive a 10% reduction in Federal highway funds. In other words, "Raise the drinking age to 21 or you'll get less money to help maintain your highways." So technically, states still get to decide their drinking age, but only at the peril of lost funds. Consequently, all states have a 21 year old drinking age.
The Feds did a similar thing for the smoking age, which is 18 in every state, I think. A state could, technically, lower their smoking age, but if they go below 18 the Federal government will without FEMA money.
The minimum age to gamble varies by state and game - for example, most states allow 18 year olds to play the lottery, even if they only permit 21 and older at casinos. The gambling age is 21 in Nevada, which is the gambling capital of the country.
About a year or two ago, I found a note my mom wrote me in 1992 (I was born in 1987). I suppose through the couple times we moved over the years she had kept it tucked away in my personal belongings and it took me a long time to find it. Apparently at that time I didn't understand too well her divorce from my Dad and she touched on that briefly. But what really got me was the multiple paragraphs she wrote about how my being born gave her life purpose and meaning. She wrote some really emotional things in that letter, and whenever I read it I get choked up. It is, by a long shot, my most cherished personal possession and I'm unsure what I would do if anything ever happened to it.
On Friday, Bernie Sanders showed us all how it’s done. For once someone got on the floor and deployed the Filibuster Tactic in a way that was commendable. Instead of doing what Republicans have been doing for the past two years, which is basically block all legislation by mere threat of a filibuster, Bernie Sanders, the Independent Senator from Vermont took the time to read to those attendance and those watching on CSpan, what’s really going on in the lives of many Americans.

I’ve been well aware of the type of work Bernie Sanders does through Thom Hartmann’s radio show, who I’ve been listening to off and on for several years, even before Air America went on the air years ago and he was one of the headlining shows. Every Friday, Bernie Sanders comes on Hartmann’s show, and reports from his home state of Vermont, how his constituents are doing, and what he’s doing on Capital Hill to help them. If you’ve ever listened to this Senator, you know that he’s one of the most realistic, pragmatic and down to earth politicians on Capital Hill. That is, if you make the same basic underlying assumption that politicians are supposed to work for the people, and not be hand puppets for corporate lobbyists.

When Sanders got on the floor on Friday to start his over 8 hour filibuster, it was in response to this proposed tax overhaul legislation, which basically extends the tax cuts for the very rich in this country, as well as extending unemployment benefits for millions of Americans.